We must remember those who have 
 been raped and murdered by men, 
 but we need to protect all women 
 and children from the “cowardly 
 criminals” who make their lives 
 unbearable.

 

 This was President Cyril 
 Ramaphosa’s message when he 
 launched the government’s 16 Days 
 of Activism for No Violence against 
 Women and Children campaign at 
 Lephalale in Limpopo on Monday.

 

 He called the scourge of gender-based violence a crisis and a great 
 shame on the good name of our nation.

 

 “It goes against our African values 
 and everything we stand for as a 
 people. We grew up being taught that 
 as men and boys we must respect 
 women and protect children. We were 
 taught to never, ever raise your hand 
 against a woman. But we have lost 
 our way.

 

 “Our communities are in the grip of 
 violence against those we are supposed 
 to protect,” he said. 

 

 Ramaphosa blamed “cowardly 
 criminals” with no regard for the 
 sanctity of human life, pointing out 
 that they do not discriminate on 
 age or gender, with many boys also 
 being raped. 

 

 “They impose their toxic 
 masculinity on those who are gay, 
 straight, transgender or bisexual. 

 

 “We are here today to unite under 
 the theme: ‘Enough is Enough’. 

 

 “Because we have truly had 
 enough,” he said.

 

 
  
 
 

 

  The “grip of violence” Ramaphosa 
 refers to is reflected in the following 
 horrifying statistics:

 

 • Year on year, there has been an 
 almost 4% increase in rapes; 

 

 • 80% of reported sexual offences 
 are rape;

 

 • Four out of every 10 women will 
 be raped in the course of their lives;

 

 • Every three hours, a woman is 
 murdered in our country.

 

 Over the next two weeks, our Don’t 
 Look Away campaign will shed light 
 on some of the enablers of gender-based violence.

 

 Self-inspection and re-evaluation 
 of how we conduct ourselves in our 
 daily lives will be part of it. Some of it will be difficult. But #Don’tLookAway.

 

 * GET INVOLVED! Share your thoughts on toxic masculinity and how it affects our society via Whatsapp on 074 557 3535. Remember to add #DontLookAway