Durban - Education MEC Kwazi Mshengu has issued a stern warning to department officials - if they fail to produce improved results they would not be entitled to their annual performance bonuses.
Mshengu was addressing delegates at the SA Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) provincial general council in Durban yesterday. 

He said the department had come to realise that good results “were not only the responsibility of teachers”. 
Every year, senior department officials sign a performance contract on their deliverables. If these are achieved, they receive a performance bonus ranging from 0% to 18% of their gross salary. 
“Each one of us is employed to make a better environment for teaching and learning and produce quality results. If you don’t pay on time for ATSM (advanced trainee selection and matching), how are you expecting that teachers will then be able to produce results?” Mshengu asked. 

Mshengu said the results they aimed to produce throughout the schooling system did not only depend on teachers, but on each and every employee in the department. 
“Since my arrival in the department, I have sought to get every employee to understand that each and every unit in the department exists to ensure that there is a proper and conducive culture of learning and teaching in schools.” 
Sadtu’s Bheki Shandu rejected the MEC’S statement, saying that in the end, workers must receive performance bonuses due to them.

“There are existing collective agreements and policies that talk to that. If the minister himself wants to attend to the issue of austerity measures, we say that they cannot start with the workers, who are responsible for service delivery that the government needs.”
Shandu said the MEC would find it easier to encourage everyone, including the officials, to put more effort into their duties, without intimidating workers.
“This bodes well with us where all of us, not only the educators, are reminded that performance bonuses must be informed by better results at the level of an institution as well. We do support the MEC when he says that if there is no performance, such a person cannot be entitled to any performance bonuses,” he said.

Mshengu said Sadtu members should take a stand in the fight against corruption in schools, including the selling of posts or abuse of school facilities. 
“Sadtu must rid itself of a narrative or image that says when there is corruption in schools, Sadtu is involved. When people speak about the selling of posts, they associate that with Sadtu. When they speak about absenteeism, they also associate that with Sadtu,” he said.
However, Shandu dismissed the MEC’s sentiments.

“In actual reality, there is no evidence that has actually proved that we are directly involved in the selling of posts. 
“If any parent, member of the community or educator has evidence of such wrongdoing, they must report it to the police,” Shandu said.
The Mercury