Durban - Scores of KwaZulu-Natal and Free State farmers have lodged an appeal to have the government’s “unlawful” decision to accept a US subsidiary firm’s “highly suspect” application to explore for oil and gas over a million hectares of prime farmland and environmentally sensitive areas in the province, withdrawn or set aside.
About 170 farmers who lodged the appeal with Energy Minister Gwede Mantashe in terms of the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act (MPRDA) on June 14 included the Clarence Farmers Association; Fouriesburg Farmers Association; Bergville Farmers Association; and Van Reenen Farmers Association.

The farmers said in their appeal that the Petroleum Agency of South Africa (Pasa) “unlawfully” accepted Rhino Oil and Gas Exploration SA’s “fatally flawed” bid for an exploration right across almost 6000 farms in northern KZN and the Free State. 
The appeal also asked that Pasa’s acceptance of the firm’s scoping report be set aside.
Land occupied by tribes and rural communities as well as pristine areas close to and adjacent to the Drakensberg also fall within the proposed exploration area. Farmers and residents have at public meetings vehemently opposed Rhino Oil and Gas’s move to explore for natural resources, saying this would lead to fracking for gas and the pollution of the country’s land and water resources. 

Farmers argued in their appeal that Pasa had unlawfully accepted Rhino Oil and Gas’s application for an exploration right, while a ministerial moratorium on the receipt of new exploration rights applications remained in force. The moratorium was published in a Government Gazette in June 2018. Pasa acknowledged receipt of the application in October.
“The moratorium states that no application for an exploration right can be accepted in terms of section 70 of the MPRDA after June 28, 2018,” the appellants argued.
They also claimed that Rhino Oil and Gas’s application did not comply with the “peremptory requirements” of section 70 of the MPRDA.

Pasa, the appellants argued, had “decided to accept the exploration application in terms of section 79 (3) of the MPRDA In circumstances where the application did not comply with the peremptory requirements as set out in the preceding paragraph, and which is fatally flawed. It is apparent that an application for an exploration right is misplaced. 
“What Rhino is attempting to do is conduct an exploration operation as defined in section 1 of the MPRDA, which includes ‘extended well-testing’. This application is a mere smokescreen of what is contemplated by Rhino. It is contended that what is anticipated by Rhino is highly suspect.”
They added that the application was “fatally flawed” for a slew of reasons, including that the plan of the land to which the application relates was allegedly not signed nor dated and had not been verified; the names and numbers of the land are absent; the plan does not contain any surface structures or registered servitudes; and no verification had been made of the information by a field survey.

Apart from the alleged unlawfulness of the decision to accept the application, the appellants contended that Pasa had not adequately notified the landowners and interested parties as is legally required of its decision to accept the application. 
Pasa’s acting chief executive, Lindiwe Mekwe, said the agency was aware that the appeal had been lodged. “Pasa today (last Tuesday) received an instruction from the Department of Mineral Resources to give its official response,” she said. 
Rhino Oil and Gas chief executive Phillip Steyn did not respond to questions at the time of publication.

The Mercury