Durban - The Department of Basic Education has warned the public not to purchase fake matric certificates from people selling them on social media.
This comes after a woman advertised fake certificates for R5000 each on Facebook. 

She said the certificates included matric certificates, Unisa certificates and UCT certificates.
The woman also offered fake Identity documents and three-months bank statements for R2000 each.
“Matric certificates ready to be delivered. Opportunities like this come once in a lifetime make (the) right decision by inboxing us or WhatsApp me,” read the post. “NB we make everything after paying deposit, will send you the picture of it.” 

When contacted by a Mercury journalist, the woman, who calls herself “Amanda”, said a deposit of R2500 was required for a matric certificate.
“Full amount R5000, you send me your details after that,” she said.
The woman claimed that the process would take three days, and she also sent an image of a matric certificate with education quality assurer Umalusi’s seal and logo, signed by the chief executive, Dr Mafu Rakometsi. 

On request, banking details were also sent to the journalist to complete the transaction.
Basic Education spokesperson Elijah Mhlanga said it was a waste of time and money to buy a fake matric certificate.
“We receive verification requests regularly and people lose their jobs or are denied admission to university once it’s discovered that it’s a fake document,” said Mhlanga.

He used the example of former KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Vincent Mdunge who is currently serving a jail term for using a fake matric certificate to gain employment.
He added that the genuine certificates were produced by Umalusi and not by the department.
“The documents have features which people can’t reproduce,” said Mhlanga. 

Umalusi spokesperson Lucky Ditaunyane said that Umalusi certificates had 12 security features, most of which needed to be withheld from the public for security reasons. 
“Umalusi certificates are fool-proof,” he said.
The Mercury