Durban - The rape and impregnation of a 12-year-old eManzimtoti pupil has prompted the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Social Development to call for the proper screening of “oMalumes” or men who transport children to and from school.
The pupil has since given birth to a baby girl.

Social Development MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza said the girl’s family laid a charge of rape against the man three months ago.
The girl told family members that the man had raped her on more than one occasion. 
 “I am deeply saddened to learn that a man entrusted with transporting a child can turn around and violate her in this manner. This is a call on us to do more to protect our children. We need to screen oMalumes and check if they do not appear on the child protection register of people convicted of committing crimes against children,” she said. 

Khoza said she would be speaking to MECs from the departments of Education and Transport and Community Safety to ensure that the process is started as soon as possible.
Khoza further called for the man to be arrested immediately.
“There is no reason why this man has not been arrested. The case was opened three months ago. This man is going on with his life like nothing happened while the child whose life he has destroyed is dealing with the trauma. He must be thrown in jail,” she said. 

The department has provided trauma counselling to the girl and her family. 
Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele confirmed that a case was opened. 
“The matter is under investigation by the Umlazi Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences Unit. The docket has been submitted to the Senior Public Prosecutor for a decision,” she said. 

KZN Department of Education spokesperson Kwazi Mthethwa said the department condemned the incident. 
He said their officials would work with their counterparts in Social Development to ensure that the suspect was arrested. 
Vee Gani of the Parents Association in KZN said parents needed to be vigilant and ensure that their children are safe at all times. 

“Parents need to vet the people who are contracted by them to take their children to school. They need to ensure that these people are properly registered and trustworthy,” he said. 
Childline KZN’s Adeshini Naicker said they were saddened by the case.
“The long term abuse would have had a deep negative impact on the child. Coupled with the fact that any 12-year-old is emotionally and physically not ready for childbirth is cause for serious concern.” 

The Mercury