DURBAN - The trial involving a mentally disabled 13-year-old girl who was allegedly trafficked and forced into a marriage with an elderly man, was postponed in the Port Elizabeth High Court yesterday.
The trial was meant to get under way but the court heard there was a possibility that proceedings may be shortened.

The uncle of the little girl, along with two other people, is facing charges that include human trafficking and concluding a forced marriage for the purposes of exploitation.
The girl’s 61-year-old “husband” faces two additional charges of rape.
The trio have not yet pleaded to the charges against them.

According to the indictment, it was alleged that the girl, who cannot be named, was forced to marry the elderly man who was known to her uncle.
The uncle is also not being named to protect the identity of the girl.
Following the death of the girl’s mother when she was just 9, she went to live with her uncle in KwaDukuza, KwaZulu-Natal, in 2012.

From there, in January 2015, the girl went to live with the daughter of one of the accused, who is a 63-year-old woman, in Bizana in rural Eastern Cape, where she attended school.
According to the indictment, the following year the 61-year-old man from Greenbushes in Port ­Elizabeth entered into lobola negotiations with the girl’s uncle and, in November 2016, the victim was told she would not return to school and would be married to the man.
The female accused then allegedly put the girl in a taxi destined for Port Elizabeth.

When she arrived at Njoli Square, the 61-year-old man is said to have met her there before taking her to his Greenbushes home, where he allegedly instructed her to undress and get into bed.
Court documents state that when the teenager resisted the man’s advances, he strangled her and raped her.
In January 2017, the man instructed his stepdaughter to take the girl to buy clothes and a bus ticket to Durban.

The victim then travelled back to Durban, where she was met by the female accused. The woman allegedly told the girl she was now a married woman and had to wear “makoti (Xhosa bride or newly-wed) clothes”.
The woman then took the girl back to Bizana, where she stayed in her “husband’s” new house and had to live and work.
In April 2017 the girl was allegedly sent back to Port Elizabeth after she was caught speaking to another child her age.

When she arrived she was allegedly taken back to the man’s house in Greenbushes, where she was repeatedly raped.
State advocate Zelda Swanepoel asked the court to postpone the matter until today to give the defence attorney time to consult.
All three of the accused are out on bail.

African News Agency (ANA)