DURBAN - Metro police have vowed to clamp down on people using vans to transport children to schools.
Yesterday, several vans were stopped and drivers fined after they were found to have been using the vehicles to pick up and drop off children at local schools.

Last week, a woman was stopped in Glenwood with more than 20 children packed into her van.
Manor Gardens Community Policing Forum chairperson Janus Horn said last Monday he confronted a woman who was transporting pupils in a van.
“She drove towards a cul-de-sac and I followed her in. She got out of the van and apologised to me. She tried to bribe me so that I would not report her. She told me she had bought the van to transport children,” he said.

Horn said he reported the woman to the metro police.
Metro police spokesperson Senior Superintendent Parboo Sewpersad said they had recently launched “Operation Malume” to target drivers using vans to transport pupils to school.
“We have issued fines to drivers who were caught yesterday morning. We also warned them that they should not be carrying passengers in vehicles that are not meant to be transporting people. Vans are classified as goods vehicles,” he said.

Parents Association chairperson Vee Gani said some viewed pupil transport as a “money-making venture”.
“They do not have the necessary public driving permits and are putting our children’s lives in danger. As parents, we need to be responsible and ensure that our children are being taken to and fetched from school responsibly,” Gani said.
Gani called for harsher fines to be given to those who were found to be using vans to transport pupils.

KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education spokesperson Kwazi Mthethwa said they would conduct an investigation into the matter. He said the department often dealt with cases in which people would apply for tenders to transport pupils and say they owned a taxi.
“You find that there is a taxi when we do our checks, but later on these people use vans instead,” he said.
In May 2001, a national regulation, in terms of the National Road Traffic Act, was passed which stated that children were not allowed to be transported in the goods compartment of a vehicle for reward.

At the time, the Automobile Association (AA) said the regulation was a good one.
“The introduction is a step in the right direction insofar as it puts the issue of pupil transport high on the road safety agenda. It also means those business operators who are taking children to school in vehicles that are either unroadworthy, or are not designed for person transport (such as bakkies), will need to repair or replace their vehicles,” the AA said.
THE MERCURY