DURBAN - Emotional scenes unfolded as the casket of metro police officer Inspector Johan Deysel passed by the fellow officers who attended his funeral in Amanzimtoti yesterday afternoon.
His crew-mate of five years, Constable Nevesh Nameekumar, held Deysel’s wife, Rina, in a tight, consoling hug throughout the procession.

Deysel died after being knocked over by a taxi at a roadblock near the Galleria shopping mall on January 11.
Speaking at the funeral, which was attended by hundreds of mourners, Nameekumar described Deysel as “a true gentleman, a great family man and an impeccable policeman”.
He and Deysel have been crew-mates since 2014, working together on almost every shift.

“They say your crew-mate becomes your family and this could not be more true His wealth of knowledge and experience could not be taught in any school or book.
“I hope I can one day be even half the policeman he was,” he said.
While soft cries could be heard through the Amanzimtoti Civic Hall, Nameekumar said it broke him to say goodbye to Deysel.

“He was always one of my biggest supporters. Johan, you may be gone but you will never be forgotten.”
The director of the eThekwini south region metro police, Derrick Sawoni, paid tribute to the “loyal” officer, saying that police officers joined the profession to make a difference.
“It is who we are. Johan now sits on God’s lap, watching and guiding us all,” he said.

The eThekwini Deputy Mayor, Fawzia Peer, offered her condolences to the Deysel family on behalf of the city of Durban.
“We are here to honour the memory and mourn the loss of Johan. We grieve with his loved ones and are here to support his family and find some meaning in this tough time,” she said.
Peer said that from the moment an officer put on their uniform, they had answered a calling, “often with little or no thanks”.

Deysel’s former colleague and friend, Inspector Norman Payne, also paid tribute to him: “Let us not mourn how he died, but celebrate how he lived.”
Deysel had worked in the police service for 34 years, with his duties ranging from protection services to a dog handler.
Originally from Johannesburg, Deysel and his wife of 20 years moved to KwaZulu-Natal in 1996, when he joined the metro police.

Deysel, from Winkelspruit, would have celebrated his 60th birthday on February 19, just days before his “miracle” baby celebrates her 2nd birthday.
- THE MERCURY