Durban - So many people turned up at the memorial service for one of the country’s most legendary helicopter pilots that dozens of mourners had to stand outside the venue.
The hangar at Virginia Airport, Durban, was packed for the service for retired Lieutenant-Colonel Graham Chisholm, 62, who died at his home in Durban North on December 27. About 300 people attended the service on Friday, retired Colonel Steve Bekker, chairperson of the SA Air Force (SAAF) Association in Durban who had known Chisholm for 42 years, said yesterday.

Chisholm, an Oryx helicopter commander based at 15 Squadron in Durban, was a chopper pilot for 39 years, flying a variety of helicopters over the years.
He was involved in countless rescue missions - many of which were dangerous - to save the lives of hikers in the Drakensberg and sick seaman out at sea.
His record for the longest sea rescue, which was more than 500km out at sea, still stands. 

He was also one of the original pilot heroes from Durban involved in the massive rescue operation which swung into action during the deadly floods that swept through Mozambique in 2000 and was awarded the SAAF Cross for his involvement.
A 2013 media report about a SAAF rescue captured Chisholm’s skill as a pilot: “With a thunderstorm hurling lightning and swirling winds battering the SAAF Oryx helicopter, Lieutenant-Colonel Graham Chisholm kept a steady hand on the controls as he descended into a rescue mission,” the article started.
Chisholm and his crew, having picked up mountain club members and a paramedic, were on their way to the Drakensberg to rescue a hiker who was bitten by a puff adder.

“Wearing night vision goggles, Chisholm navigated through the narrow passes of the mountainous region until he located the hikers.”
But they could not land due to the steep sides of the valley and Chisholm had to hover while his flight-sergeant lowered the mountain club men and the paramedic by hoist.
Chisholm had later described the mission: “You are in a gorge, the winds are swirling and I am looking to the left and right, the co-pilot is reading the instruments, and the engineer is hoisting the guys. You are in the dark at 2280m. 

“There were thunderstorms in the Berg and the lightning sometimes blacks out the night vision.” 
Chisholm, who retired two years ago, had once said it was mostly a thankless task, but he enjoyed doing it and he and his crew were always there to help people in need.
Bekker paid a personal tribute to Chisholm as well as a formal tribute on behalf of the SAAF Association, while another tribute was paid by Lieutenant-Colonel John Dyer, the former commanding officer of the 105 Air Force Reserve Squadron, part of SAAF base in Durban.

Other tributes were paid to Chisholm by his children and grandchildren.
He is survived by his wife Asthore, his five children and 11 grandchildren. 
The Mercury