Durban - A 17-year-old Pietermaritzburg matric pupil climbed Mt Kilimanjaro in Tanzania and summited the mountain’s Uhuru Peak on January 1 to raise funds for a children’s charity.
Joelle Botha, who is from Durban and will write matric at Pietermaritzburg Girls’ High School, said that in 2016, she, along with her father Craig Botha, decided to climb the mountain to raise funds for the children of LIV Village “to enable other children to have opportunities”. 

“The youth are South Africa’s future and we need to be investing in their futures,” said Joelle.
The father and daughter team managed to raise R55000 for the children’s village.
The teen said preparations were difficult throughout the year because she was so busy with sport.

“I relied heavily on hockey (all year round) to maintain high aerobic fitness levels and worked on strength training at gym,” she said.
She added that about three weeks before the climb, they started to do more high intensity climbs and hikes to prepare during the school holidays.
“We would walk at least eight kilometres a day to get our feet used to the impact,” said Joelle.

The duo were accompanied by Joelle’s friend Maria Diedrick and other team members, including guides and porters.
Joelle described the climb as “breathtaking, both literally and figuratively”. 
“We hiked through many different ecosystems and the trees and plant life became very scarce near the end, but then the glaciers became the highlight as they are so beautiful,”she said.

She said summit night, which is the final few hours of the climb, was the most difficult.
“We departed from Barafu camp (base camp) at 12pm and only summited at 7.40am the next morning,” Joelle said.
She said walking for many hours in the dark made her incredibly tired.

“That many hours of walkingleads to dangerous situations where I fell asleep while walking, but thankfully I had a great team to look out for me,” she said. 
Joelle explained how her teammate had to stop climbing on day five due to temporary blindness brought on by oxygen deprivation. 
“It was scary not knowing how our bodies would react in the next 100 metres of elevation,” she said.

For Joelle, reaching the top was a moment of “incredible triumph”. 
“After working so hard and seeing so many people turn back, when you get to the sign you really feel as though you couldn’t have done more. You are absolutely ecstatic at how far you’ve come and how many obstacles you’ve managed to beat,” she said. 
The Mercury