DURBAN - The ongoing land invasions and subsequent protests in Cato Crest are forcing residents to sell their homes out of concern for their safety.
In the past six months, there has been a spate of protests after land invasion units destroyed illegally erected shacks in the bushes alongside Mary Thiphe Road, which borders the Mayville and Manor Gardens suburbs.

Last month, protesters took to the streets and burnt tyres and tree branches after shacks were demolished. At least five electrical poles were cut down.
A resident who has lived on Mary Thiphe Road for the past eight years said he feared for the safety of his family.
The resident, who asked not to be named, said his wife was attacked during the last wave of protests.

 
 
  Police monitoring a group of protesters along King Cetshwayo (Jan Smuts) Highway in Cato Manor. Picture supplied
 


“Our windows were broken and our home was attacked on more than one occasion. In December, my wife was hit with a brick on her shoulder. I have now put our home up for sale,” he said.
The man said he was not interested in how much he could make from the sale of his home - he was more focused on getting his family out of the area as soon as possible.

“I am desperate,” he said.
Other residents have complained of incessant noise through the night as invaders worked to erect their shacks.
One resident said it was sad that the government had failed to provide housing for the invaders.

“Many of the shack dwellers are borrowing money to erect these illegal shacks that will be destroyed. Surely the municipality can do something to provide formal housing for the people in Cato Crest?
“The biggest concern is the violent aftermath the residents living in Mary Thiphe road will experience once the shacks are demolished,” a resident said.

 
 
  Illegal connections in Cato crest informal settlements Picture: DOCTOR NGCOBO
 


The municipality failed to respond to a request for comment yesterday.
Last year, eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede called on residents to be patient while the city worked to find suitable land and funding for low-cost housing for residents. At the time, Gumede said building on land without permission was not only an illegal act, but disrupted the municipality’s programmes as the land might be earmarked for other infrastructure development projects.

 
 
  Municipal cars were torched on Friday night by land invaders in Cato Crest.
 


THE MERCURY