Durban - Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) members in eThekwini turned up the heat on the ANC after they stormed the party’s provincial head offices yesterday. The aggrieved MKMVA members protested against the party’s failure to attend to their well-being, including the provision of houses and job opportunities.
The incident comes as the entire ANC leadership and state president, Cyril Ramaphosa, is in the province in preparation for the party’s January 8 birthday celebrations. 

Ramaphosa was campaigning on the KwaZulu-Natal South Coast when the incident took place.
Other members of the national executive committee are also criss-crossing the province, mobilising support for the week-long birthday celebrations, which will culminate in the ANC’s manifesto launch in Durban on January 12.
More than 100 members of the association camped inside the party’s offices.

When the association arrived, it elected representatives to negotiate with the ANC leaders on their behalf. The ANC was represented by the chairperson of the eThekwini region, Zandile Gumede, regional secretary Bheki Ntuli and the provincial secretary, Mdumiseni Ntuli.
The two groups were locked in negotiations for most of the day, and the outcomes were not clear last night as negotiations were ongoing. 
MKMVA provincial head Themba Mavundla said he had been made aware of the occupation of the provincial ANC offices. 

“I am waiting to get more information. The branches are allowed to do their own thing, they don’t have to alert the provincial structures. I don’t yet know what their grievances are,” he said.
The chairperson of the MKMVA in eThekwini, Mxolisi Nyuswa, said he was conflicted about the invasion of the ANC offices. 
“On the one hand, that makes it look like the ANC is not working, but on the other hand, frustration has been growing. If you have an issue, what are you supposed to do about it? These veterans have been suffering for a long time,” he said.

“The MKMVA are members of the ANC and have challenges they have raised numerous times, but (these) have not been addressed. That is why they have decided to escalate this matter through the proper structures.
“Job opportunities is the main issue the members want addressed at this stage,” said Nyuswa. 
For the past few months, MKMVA members demanded that municipalities provide job and business opportunities to its members. They have stormed several councils. They protested outside the offices of eThekwini, Msunduzi and Mooi River municipalities, while they locked out workers at the Richmond municipality.

“We have tried to deal directly with the municipality, but we have not made much headway.” 
Nyuswa said the MKMVA members were in need of assistance. 
“The older generation is struggling. Some of them have no place to sleep, no food and no jobs - and they cannot get jobs because they are old.

“There are issues of housing and special pensions that needed to be addressed. Those things will at least alleviate their suffering,” he said. 
ANC provincial spokesperson Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu said she could not comment on the outcome of the meeting as it was still in progress.
“The members are unhappy with the outcome of their engagement with the leadership of eThekwini region and have decided to escalate the matter to the provincial leadership,” she said. 

Simelane-Zulu said it would be unfair to view the meeting as part of the MKMVA pressure campaign to get jobs and business. 
“We cannot have a blanket approach; the issues they are raising must be looked at individually.” 
Political analyst Protas Madlala said MKMVA was applying political pressure on the provincial ANC.

“They know that all the senior leaders of the ANC are here and, by putting pressure on the ANC, the party will in turn put pressure on the municipalities.
“As the election draws nearer, you will see many protests emerging with even the powerless taking the opportunity to strike when the party is vulnerable,” he said. 
The Mercury