DURBAN - Unisa has started making space available after hundreds of students protested outside the tertiary institution in Durban on Tuesday, according to the student representative council (SRC).
This comes more than a week after the university reached an agreement with the SRC to end strike action which had started at the beginning of this month.

SRC treasurer Nkanyiso Zwide said the students had embarked on protest action because Unisa management had failed to keep its promises.
He said students that completed the Adult Basic Education and Training (Abet) initiative, which is a bridging course before starting a degree, were told Unisa had reached its capacity for placements.
“We have a lot of students who were told to do the access programme in order to do a degree.

“Now the university is saying there are no spaces.
“Majority of students were doing higher certificates called Abet which is an access course to a BEd.
“They finished Abet last year and when they came to register for BEd, they were told it’s full,” said Zwide.

Zwide said that yesterday students were being assisted to register.
He also noted that some qualifications offered by Unisa were not registered with the South African Qualifications Authority (Saqa).
Martin Ramotshela, Unisa’s spokesperson, said the issues raised by the students, in particular the demand for students who completed higher certificates, the opening of the PGCE programme as well as the reinstatement of students who had been incorrectly phased out; are all receiving attention in accordance with the agreement reached with the national SRC.

He said students who have applied and meet the minimum requirements, and to whom offers have been made, are receiving assistance with their registration.
“You must appreciate that Unisa can only take the number of students as allowed by the enrolment plan, which places a limit of 380000 students. Of these, 54434 were for first-time students,” said Ramotshela.
He said the university had also made an additional 10887 spaces available as part of the strike settlement with students.

Ramotshela said the matter regarding the Saqa IDs had also been resolved.
“Students who had previously applied for these closed qualifications will now be informed via email of the outcomes of their applications,” he said.
He said no decision has been made to extend the registration period which ends tomorrow, although the SRC had requested the date be moved to the end of January.

- THE MERCURY