DURBAN - More than 10 years after an assistant librarian at a community library in Klerksdorp was raped in broad daylight in her office, she is still out of pocket.
The librarian is struggling to get full compensation as ordered by the court.

The Compensation Commissioner was in 2017 ordered to increase the R2 720 a month which it paid to the woman. This came after she applied for additional compensation as she couldn’t afford to pay her ongoing medical bills.
The woman, however, last week told the Gauteng High Court, Pretoria, that she was still waiting for the additional money.
Judge Billy Mothle gave the director-general of the Department of Labour two months to pay the additional funds. He also gave the woman the go-ahead to return to court to hold the director-general in contempt of court if the additional money was not paid to her within this time. The woman, who cannot be identified, blamed her employer for the incident. She said she had time and again over a number of years complained about the unsafe working conditions.

She reported incidents of crime at the library, including staff being mugged, assaulted, threatened and various burglaries at the premises. Her car’s tyres were slashed on one occasion.
Her complaints fell on deaf ears and she told the court her life was ruined when she was raped.
She said that the library had a single entrance with insufficient security measures. Her office was inside the library without a separate exit.

“On July 14, 2008, at about 9am I was brutally raped and assaulted in the library at knifepoint.”
The victim initially sued the City of Matlosana (formerly Klerksdorp). She instituted a damages claim against her employer.
Her employer, defending the action, at first simply denied the rape had taken place. It later added that if the court found she had been raped, it was not her employer’s fault as it could not have foreseen the incident.

In yet another plea, the City of Matlosana still denied the rape, but said in the event the court found the woman had been raped, it must be found she was negligent as she had failed to protect herself from attack.
The victim withdrew her claim against the municipality as she became unemployable due to the ongoing trauma. The court initially ordered her to pay the city’s legal fees, but a full bench (three judges) on appeal set the costs order aside. The judges at the time commented that the implication that she was to blame for her own fate was deeply insensitive and offensive.
The woman continued to claim from the Compensation Commissioner, who agreed to pay her R2 720 a month, with yearly increases. This was because she had been rendered permanently disabled.

- THE MERCURY