DURBAN - Morningside residents have raised serious concerns over the spike in hijackings in the area recently, with many calling for an increase in visible policing.
Residents have also called for bushy areas at road corners and stop streets to be chopped down as the alleged hijackers use them as hiding spots.

In the latest incident, hijackers took a motorist on a nightmare drive before abandoning the vehicle in Springfield Park early on Monday morning.
The suspects fled on foot over a pedestrian bridge that crosses the Umgeni River after the victim’s car was located at an ATM. It is believed the hijacking occurred at a property in Fyfe Road at around 1.28am.
It was reported that the suspects had jumped out of the bushes at the side of the road and hijacked three men, taking one victim hostage.

The vehicle was later located parked in Intersite Avenue, where the suspects had gone to draw cash at an ATM. The victim was found unharmed, standing outside the vehicle.
In a separate incident, a young woman was hijacked by men who had also hidden in the nearby bushes on Fyfe Road. She was thrown out of the vehicle before the suspects drove off.
In December, Marta Rubilar was hijacked just seconds after she parked her vehicle outside her work premises in Morningside.

It was reported that the men approached Rubilar, grabbing her handbag and cellphone. She was bundled into the back seat, with one of the men driving off in her car.
The entire ordeal was captured on CCTV cameras and the footage went viral. A search was then initiated for Rubilar, who was found unharmed less than four hours later in the Newlands area. Her vehicle was also recovered a short while later.
Asibonge Mdlalose appeared briefly in the Durban Magistrate’s Court after he was arrested a week later. He faces charges of robbery with aggravating circumstances, and kidnapping. He is in custody until his formal bail application later this month.

Two Morningside councillors have confirmed they were aware of the increase in hijackings and house-breakings in the area.
Ward 27 councillor Martin Meyer said he believed criminals who used to operate in the Berea area have since moved their activities to Morningside.
Meyer said he had written to the provincial police to review their policing boundaries as parts of Morningside were policed by Mayville police, “which is frankly too far out”.

“By the time people call the Mayville police to come out, it is too long. We need a closer police station to be responding to incidents,” Meyer said.
Ward 25 councillor Hassan Haniff urged residents to join community WhatsApp groups so that they could be alerted to crimes, crime hotspots and community meetings where they could raise their concerns.
“We need more people to join our community patrol groups. We need to take back our area from these criminals,” he said.

Hassan also advised residents and motorists not to follow routine travel routes and times, and to be aware of their surroundings.
The police media centre said they were awaiting information regarding the issue, but they had not responded by the time of publication.
THE MERCURY