Durban - Testing stations in KwaZulu-Natal are battling to deal with the increased number of motorists looking to renew their driving licences.
The testing centres have been experiencing long queues, staff shortages and malfunctioning machines. Irate motorists visiting the driving licence testing grounds have complained that they have had to wait for hours in long queues and sometimes leave without being assisted.

The KwaDukuza and Rossburgh testing grounds visited by The Mercury yesterday are some of the testing stations battling to deliver services to the public.
Residents have complained that the stations close early and assist a limited number of people a day.
KwaDukuza station falls under the KwaDukuza municipality and Rossburgh belongs to the provincial Department of Transport.

The delays highlighted come as the country is still recovering from a strike by workers at the Driving Licensing Card Account (DLCA) in Gauteng that left many without licences. The company produces licence cards.
Themba Masango of the #NotInMyName campaign, that supported the striking DLCA employees, said the workers had returned to work in December and were producing thousands of cards each day.
Motorists at the Rossburgh station expressed different opinions on the delays. One motorist, who asked not to be named, said: “I came to renew my public driver’s permit (PDP) and I have been here since 10am. I am only leaving now at 3pm. They closed at 2.30pm and I have not finished all I needed to do and will have to come back tomorrow.”Another motorist said he had renewed his driving licence and had to wait four more weeks to get the new card. 

“There are some people who applied the same time as I who did not get their cards today.”
At the KwaDukuza station, a resident took to social media to complain about having to wait from 7.30am and leaving without being assisted. 
“Two hours later, having not even got through the door of the room in which forms are handed out, pics are taken, eyes are tested, and bums are shifted up and down benches, nearer and nearer to the machine which takes your money, I left,” said Erica Platter in a Facebook post.

KwaDukuza DA councillor Malcolm Hubner said they had received numerous complaints about the delays. 
“We have received complaints from members of the public facing long queues when they go to renew their driver’s licence. 
“Because of the challenges, they now have a quota of how many people they assist a day. People are queuing there from early in the morning,” he said. 

Sipho Mkhize, media liaison officer of the KwaDukuza municipality, said the issue of delays in licences was beyond their control. Attempts to speak to the provincial Department of Transport were unsuccessful yesterday. 
The Mercury