Durban - A new year and new resolutions to dig deep with green roots.
This new year brings a renewed resolve to be more conscious of my daily actions.

It shouldn’t be that hard though, as everywhere you turn, everyone is going green.
An increasing number of Durban restaurants are doing away with single-use straws, paper shopping bags are all the rage, recycling depots are popping up at major retailers across the country, and I even saw Woolworths do up its window displays over the festive season with recycled plastics, and they looked amazing.
So how hard can it be to make a resolution to go green?

Here are a few simple suggestions from leading greenie activists to help us on our way to making 2019 a very green year:
Household energy audits: for this one, you don’t need to pay for the services of an outside contractor to assess your energy usage. Appoint one member of the family who is responsible for checking that everyone is accountable for turning off the lights if a section of the house is not in use - much like an energy monitor.
Spend time outdoors: the value of a natural environment cannot truly be appreciated if we do not know what it is. Similarly, we won’t know the value of conservation if we are not exposed to the natural world.

Make a note to spend one family outing a month outdoors, rather than at the movies or playing TV games. I owe my appreciation for the outdoors to my dad, for spending countless hours at the beach fishing.
You can go for a hike, or a walk, spend time at the beach, or learning about the natural environment. Visit eThekwini municipality’s Green Hub at Blue Lagoon, for ideas on “green destinations”.
Make a list of the nearest recycling depots, and charity shops in your area: having a handy list and route planner will make it easier to drop off good items you no longer need at a charity shop, or drop off for recycling.

Follow bloggers for daily tips: Visit The Zero-Waste Chef, Zero Waste Journey in Southern Africa, Bea Johnson’s Zero Waste Home and take from their personal experiences.
Adopt Meatless Monday: studies show that meat consumption is one of the biggest contributors to greenhouse gases, due to the methane gas created by livestock. The movement encourages the use of non-animal-based meals on Mondays. Find recipes at www.meatlessmonday.com
Avoid paper: some stores ask whether you’d like a printed receipt, or an emailed one. Opt for the latter. Also, many bills that we receive in the post, can be emailed, check with the company if they can simply email a statement.

Buy local, where possible: from food to clothing, products and gifts, choose locally made goods that support local businesses and create employment, and do not need shipping across countries.
Microbeads: check whether your cosmetic ranges contain microbeads, often included for exfoliation purposes. These tiny plastic particles end up in the ocean. Swap for natural exfoliators such as local mealie meal or sugar.
Repair: we often say recycle, refuse or repurpose, but repair is forgotten. Try fixing appliances before throwing them away.

Get into recycled fashion: make a statement by supporting crafty people who make fashionable items out of recycled products. Check out Magic Bean Foundation, from Durban, where shopping bags are turned into fashionable bags, and support women who rely on this income.
Independent On Saturday