DURBAN - Two men who are believed to be linked to a spate of attacks on e-hailing taxi drivers in Durban have been arrested.
They were nabbed following a sting operation by two quick-thinking officers in Mayville.

Mayville SAPS and eThekwini Cluster Community Policing Forum (CPF) chairperson, Imtiaz Syed, said a driver received a request to pick up a passenger, but when he got to the meeting place he did not feel comfortable, and drove on, he said.
“He spotted police officers who were conducting a stop and search on the road and told them that when he stopped for the client, he noticed that the man was not alone and he seemed suspicious.
“He asked the officers to check out the passengers before he picked them up,” Syed said.

The officers then suggested that the driver go back and pick up the men and they would orchestrate a stop and search once they were picked up. Syed said the driver complied and collected the three passengers.
“As planned, the officers stopped the car and the planned search continued. One of the suspects fled while the other two were being searched.
“A 9mm pistol with its serial number filed off, and ammunition, were found on one of the suspects,” Syed said.

He said the arrests are believed to be a major breakthrough into police investigations into robberies and hijackings of e-hailing taxis.
“The drivers, through their own communication platforms, believe the suspects are the same people implicated in other cases of hijackings of the commuter service providers,” Syed said.
Provincial police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane confirmed the arrests.

“The men were arrested and charged with being in possession of an unlicensed firearm and ammunition.
“The suspects will be profiled to establish if there is a link to e-hailing hijackings in the area,” Zwane said.
Meanwhile, two teenagers, 16 and 18, were arrested for allegedly hijacking an e-hailing taxi driver in Inanda last week.

The pair are believed to have requested a driver at just after 8pm on January 13. When the driver arrived, the men got in.
According to police, the driver was ordered to drive to Lindelani and, on the way, they were stopped by a police vehicle.
The driver told the officers what was going on and the teens were searched. A firearm and four rounds of ammunition were found.

- THE MERCURY