NEW DELHI - President Cyril Ramaphosa wrapped up a visit to India yesterday as chief guest at its 70th Republic Day celebrations.
It was Ramaphosa’s first visit to India as president and he joined tens of thousands who watched as India showcased its military might and cultural diversity.

Security in the capital was tight, with thousands of police and soldiers deployed. Cellphone signals around the venue were blocked.
Ramaphosa and Prime Minister Narendra Modi sat and watched proceedings from behind bullet-proof glass.
Military vehicles made their way along an 8km road from Rajput to the Red Fort in central Delhi. It included the main battle tank, Bhishma, which is a version of the Russian-made T90, self-propelled artillery and the Akash air defence missile system. The Rudra light attack helicopter put on a display overhead, while the crowd-pleasers were India’s front-line fighter planes, the Su-30 and MiG-29.

South Africa used to supply India with military equipment but India blacklisted South Africa’s state-owned Denel in 2005 following allegations of corruption.

 
 
  India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi waves as he walks with President Cyril Ramaphosa, front, during India’s 70th Republic Day celebrations in New Delhi yesterday. HARISH TYAGI EPA-EFE ANA
 

Such issues have now been resolved and India has expressed interest in doing business with Denel.
Overall, there is interest in “rejuvenating” the relationship and trade between the countries.
In contrast to the military might on display was a tribute to Mahatma Gandhi, whose 150th anniversary was being commemorated this year.

Gandhi was an advocate of non-violence, a philosophy he practised in South Africa and later when he led India to freedom from British rule.
Several Indian states and institutions took part in a procession that paid tribute to Gandhi through the culture and music representative of their state.
In one such display, the Indian Railways reflected how in 1893 a 24-year-old Gandhi was thrown out of a first-class railway carriage in Pietermaritzburg as a result of discrimination against Indians.

Meanwhile, on Friday afternoon, Ramaphosa delivered the first Gandhi Mandela Freedom Lecture in New Delhi.
He paid tribute to Indian leaders who he described as having been consistent in their solidarity with the liberation struggles not just of South Africa but also of other African countries.
He acknowledged the role played by the South African Indian community in the struggle against apartheid.

“They were unwavering in their belief in the unity of all oppressed and stood firmly against attempts by the apartheid state to divide our people along ethnic or tribal lines.
“They believed, as has been the founding principle of the ANC, that South Africa belongs to all who live in it.”
He said the legacies of Gandhi and Mandela went beyond their stature as founding fathers.

“What they lived for, what they stood for and indeed what they fought for continue to resonate with people across the world decades since their birth.”
He described both as visionaries.
“We often take for granted the sheer force of will, courage of conviction and strength of character that would have been required at such times.”

Ramaphosa took aim at those who had criticised Gandhi and Mandela recently.
“The issues they advocated for and how they articulated them; the political positions they took and the political decisions they made will always be subject to interpretation and re-interpretation.
“Those of us who have chosen a life of politics will know too well that the actions we undertake at a particular time will by necessity be held up to public scrutiny by future generations. They may be praised, but they may also be derided or condemned.

“Yet we know that the transience of politics is one thing, and the enduring nature of universal values - of justice, of equality, of self-sacrifice, of solidarity with the underdog - are another.”
Sunday Tribune