DURBAN - One of the rarest antelope species in Southern Africa, the bontebok, is thriving in the unexpected setting of Somerset West wine estate Vergelegen.
Vergelegen welcomed nine newborn bontebok to its growing bontebok herd this summer, bringing the number of animals to 50.

This marked a great improvement since 13 bontebok were transferred to Vergelegen 10 years ago.
Bontebok (Damaliscus pygargus pygargus) are one of the rarest antelope species in the world - only 2500-3000 remain.
They are recognisable by purplish highlights on their sleek chocolate-brown coats, a white rump patch, and a white blaze on their faces.

Bontebok once roamed the Southern Cape in large numbers, but hunting decimated them to 17 in the world.
The animals were saved by the Van der Bijl and other farming families, and the Bontebok National Park was established.
“We first welcomed 13 bontebok to the estate about 10 years ago,” said Vergelegen chief executive Don Tooth.

“Our conservationist at that time, Gerald Wright, was on the advisory board of the Helderberg Nature Reserve. He and City of Cape Town vet Dr Elzette Jordan noted that the reserve was becoming overpopulated with bontebok.
“There was insufficient grazing to support all the animals. Some mineral deficiencies, especially zinc and possibly copper, were becoming apparent. The animals were captured and transferred to us, with the understanding that nine antelope would always belong to the city,” Tooth said.
The buck were treated for ecto- parasites and given copper and zinc supplements, and are now thriving.

About 1900ha of the 3000ha estate was declared a private nature reserve last year.
There are now three breeding groups on the estate, said Vergelegen environment manager Eben Olderwagen. Each group consists of one ram and seven to eight ewes, the newborns distributed among them. Another group of about five young rams travels together after being chased out by other bontebok, while more young rams roam the property in small groups. They all look after themselves.
Find out more at www.vergelegen.co.za

- THE MERCURY