DURBAN - The family of a Durban cyclist who was killed on the M4 near the M27 eMdloti off-ramp at the weekend said “it feels like a dream” and they are finding it hard to cope with what happened and adjust.
Craig Diedericks, a member of the Cycle Specialists Club, was struck down and sustained fatal injuries -along with two other cyclists who were moderately injured - by a minibus taxi.

Family spokesperson and committee member of the club, Aroon Patel, said the family was devastated.
“They can’t really express their emotions at the moment. It feels like a dream, although they are making funeral arrangements,” said Patel.
The Diedericks family described Craig as soft-hearted and gentle with a tough exterior.

“He was very compassionate and always looking to support his fellow man. He fed the community and helped people in difficulty get a step up,” Patel said.
He said that this was the worst incident that has happened to the club, which had about 150 members and was established three years ago.
“We are devastated by the incident. I never wanted to have to call anyone and let them know that their loved one is not coming home.”

He said although the cyclists were taking the incident badly, they would not stop cycling.
“Craig would not want us to stop.
“He did not cycle with fear on the road and we have a very strong safety mindset in our club,” Patel said.

“We use marshals, safety route briefings and support vehicles on most of our rides. We especially design our routes quite carefully, and ensure that we have the right protective gear and have lights on back and front,” he said.
Patel, who is also convener of the eThekwini Cycle Safe Forum - created after Jarred Dwyer and Richard da Silva lost their lives on the M4 in 2016 - said all relevant parties agreed to make the stretch of highway where the two were killed a no-ride zone.
eThekwini Municipality spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said the M4 between Sandile Thusi and Ann Arbor off-ramps going north was within the municipality’s responsibility.

“Given that this is a class 1 road (freeway) with speeds in excess of 100km/* , cyclists are prohibited to use the road,” Mayisela said.
All cyclists and pedestrians were discouraged from using this class of road, he said.
However Patel said the club would not make “much change” to the route because they believed the stretch of road where the weekend accident occurred fell under the Department of Transport and was “rideable”.

“It is not about the stretch of road and the speed, it’s about motorists being aware of cyclists and able to share the road safely with cyclists.”
The funeral service will be held at St Anne’s Catholic Church in Sydenham tomorrow at 11am.
- THE MERCURY