DURBAN - The so-called “Springs Monster” has lost his bid to appeal his effective 35-year jail sentence for torturing his five children.
His advocate turned to the Gauteng High Court, Pretoria, yesterday to ask for leave to appeal against his sentence before a full bench (three judges) of this court.

The father, who cannot be identified to safeguard his children, is of the opinion that 35 years in jail is a shockingly harsh sentence. He referred to it as a “Methuselah” sentence.
It was stated in papers before Judge Eben Jordaan that the father was of the opinion that another court would rule in his favour and lessen his sentence.
The 41-year-old was, in October, sentenced to a total of 67 years’ imprisonment after he was convicted on 16 charges. This included 10 years for the rape of his then 16-year-old daughter and another 10 years for attempting to murder his then 11-year-old son.

Judge Jordaan at the time ruled that some of the sentences had to run concurrently, so that the father at least had the hope of being released one day. Counsel for the father said the court underplayed his personal circumstances or did not pay much regard to them, while the interests of the community were overemphasised.
The father remained mum during his lengthy trial, although he denied that he had tortured his children, raped his daughter or attempted to murder his son.
However, he did call expert witnesses who analysed his troubled childhood, in the hope that this would serve as mitigation during sentencing.

His psychologist said he presented the characteristics of a sadist and a psychopath. This, she said, was due to a combination of factors, including genes and environmental factors. She added that his troubled childhood contributed to the person he became.
It was said that he grew up with violence in his home and that his mother had shot his father, after which she had committed suicide. He claimed that he was also raped on occasion by a friend of his father’s.
He also did not finish school, and Weskoppies Hospital said in a report that he had a “low average intellect”.

Judge Jordaan, however, yesterday concluded that it was a reasonable sentence, especially given how the father had treated his children over a number of years. The judge said that in his opinion, no other court would come to a different finding.
The father did not attend yesterday’s court proceedings.
After he was sentenced last year and while he was taken down to the holding cells, the man vowed to appeal against his sentence. He said he never did the things as claimed in court, and that he would do anything to one day see his children. They are all in a place of safety and the court heard that they attended a special school.

The eldest two children were not allowed to attend school while they lived with their parents in the so-called “Springs house of horrors”. Their siblings were at the time too young to attend school.
Their mother, 40, was spared a prison sentence as Jordaan handed her a suspended sentence. He sentenced her to five years’ imprisonment, suspended for five years, provided that she underwent therapy during this time. This was after she was convicted on several charges of child abuse and neglect.
The court accepted that she, too, was a victim of her husband’s abuse.

Clinical psychologist Franco Visser, who issued a report to the court regarding the mother, was of the opinion that she was a defenceless victim.
“I cannot differ,” the judge said last year.
A psychologist, who held various interviews with him, said the father was a danger to those close to him. He was manipulative and tried to control everyone around him. That is why he kept his children imprisoned in their double-storey home.

The man told Visser that he refused to let them go to school because he “feared for their safety”.
Judge Jordaan said this was clearly a lie.
- THE MERCURY