Durban - Telkom has apologised to an elderly woman after she battled to sort out issues with her new Telkom cordless phone for the last four months. 
Maya Sewpal-Singh, 74, told The Mercury that for the last four months, she has been battling to get the service provider to well, provide her with a better service. 

Sewpal-Singh, who is quite ill, said at the beginning of August last year Telkom called to offer her a cordless phone to replace her landline.
She said before the cordless phone arrived, her landline was disconnected and her number was given to someone else.
“I battled to get transport and went to Telkom in Overport with a phone account and my ID to prove the number is mine and they said all they can do is send and email because a technician needs to change the number back,” she said.

Singh said over two months went by and they “didn't convert it back” to her name.
“Eventually I asked a friend of a friend who knew someone at Telkom to assist to transfer my number back onto my name” she said.
The phone arrived about a month ago according to Singh

“The cordless phone requires a sim card, but no sim card was provided. I tried to charge the phone but the battery did not work. Telkom advised me to go into the store to sort the problem out,” Singh said.
Singh said during this time another agent called to offer her the same cordless phone and after explaining her issues, the agent promised to send her a new one.
“I’m still waiting,”she said.

She added that Telkom has been deducting installments for the unused cordless phone from the R2000 credit she has with them.
“Over the past four months they have been billing me for a phone I am unable to use. How can they do all this to an elderly person who is sick, has no means of transport and is not savvy with cell phones,” Singh said.
Telkom spokesperson Nomalungelo Faku said they regret the inconvenience caused to Sewpal-Singh.

"We are working to resolve her issue.  
She said Telkom is in the process of upgrading technologies for fixed voice and DSL services to enable a better customer experience.
“The cordless phone operates using mobile technologies and a sim card is delivered with the cordless phone,” said Faku.

Faku added that there is no cost for the change in the handset, which offers additional functionality such as wifi.
“Customers who experience problems with their wireless phones should log a fault online so that we can resolve the issue and process credits accordingly,” she said.
Contact Telkom Customer Care on 10210@telkom.co.za or by calling 10210.

The Mercury