DURBAN - An international study has flagged South Africa as a leading regional importer of chemicals used in the manufacture of illicit drugs, particularly synthetic drugs.
The International Narcotics Control Strategy Report, compiled by the US Bureau for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, has found that South Africa is also the largest market for illicit drugs in sub-Saharan Africa. Dagga is the most commonly used illicit drug in South Africa, according to the study.

It found that a dangerous trend that has emerged in poorer communities is the use of a combination of heroin and dagga called “nyaope”.
“Such drugs are often adulterated with other substances. Quantification of domestic drug use is difficult," the report read.
The SAPS’s annual crime statistics indicate that drug-related crime continued to rise between April 2016 and March 2017.

“Nationwide operations involved the South African police and military raids, and resulted in the arrest of an estimated 10000 suspects and the seizure of large quantities of weapons and drugs.
“Chemicals confiscated include ethanol and toluene. Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine, used in South Africa to produce methamphetamine, largely originate in Nigeria and India.
“Human couriers from the United Arab Emirates have also been arrested for attempting to traffic these chemicals through OR Tambo International Airport,” read the report.

Heroin and cocaine were primarily imported in finished form, and the chemicals used in their production were not as commonly found as those used to manufacture methamphetamine and methaqualone.
“South Africa is the largest market for illicit drugs in sub-Saharan Africa and serves as a trans-shipment point for cocaine and heroin primarily destined for Europe.
“South American cocaine enters South Africa primarily via air to OR Tambo International Airport. A portion is distributed for local consumption, and the remainder is trafficked internationally, often controlled by Nigerian criminal organisations,” the report stated.

David Bayever, of South Africa's Central Drug Authority, said: “Our borders are porous and we have a number of entry routes, both coastal and inland, that are difficult to man and control.
"What has happened is that many drugs find their way... (here), then they are exported to the next port of call, but the authorities on the other side are more stringent, so these chemicals remain in South Africa.”
Bayever added that other than the health issues, drugs also created bigger problems for South Africa.

“They are not only addictive, but they also change people's perceptions and ability to respond, as they are in a stupor.
“This whole drug industry is a huge drain on resources.”
He added that there had been some improvements in the last year or so.

“Because of the strong collaboration and sharing of information with narcotic boards, South Africa has been able to identify the transit of drugs into the country.”
THE MERCURY