DURBAN - “He was my hero that night.” These were the sentiments of Durban father Ravin Sankar after his 13-year-old son remained calm during a hijacking outside their Springfield home, despite having a gun pointed at his head.
Sankar and his family had just returned from buying supper in their Golf 7 GTi when they were approached by armed men.

“I usually get out and lock my family in the car, then open the gate. For some reason as I stopped the car, Joash got out and unlocked the gate. My wife and I were talking. I saw a white Nissan Almera parked next to us and saw someone pull a balaclava over his head. I told my wife and daughter to get out of the car because I was being hijacked.
"My wife refused and my daughter got out and walked towards her brother. I then saw that one of them had a gun pointed at Joash’s head,” Sankar said.
Eventually his wife alighted from the car and stood with their daughter.

The men pushed Sankar into the back seat of his car and drove off. They were followed by the Almera.
Sankar said when he looked at his family before being shoved into the car, he believed it was the last time he would see them.
Sankar didn’t realise that his son had run after the cars. “While running down the road after us, Joash shouted and banged on our neighbours’ doors telling them to please help,” Sankar said.

During the ordeal, which lasted almost two hours, Sankar said the men beat him and kept asking where the tracking device was.
He said the hijackers eventually stopped the car and told him to get out.
As he got out, he said one of the men cocked a firearm, and he was convinced he was going to die. He ran to a house for help and was later picked up in uMlazi. His car’s tracking device was found, but the car is still missing.

Sankar said he was proud of his son. “Joash was my hero that day. He was calm and did not scream,” he said.
Sankar expressed his thanks to all those who played a part in his rescue.
A soft-spoken Joash said he was just glad that his father was safe.

A case has been opened at the Mayville SAPS.
- THE MERCURY