Durban - eThekwini Municipality has decided to indefinitely postpone the unveiling of the R20 million statues of South Africa’s liberation struggle icons, Nelson Mandela and Oliver Tambo.
This comes after opposition parties criticised the cost of the statues and said the funds could have been spent on service delivery. 

However in an interview with eNCA, Thembinkosi Ngcobo, municipal head of parks, recreation and culture in eThekwini, dismissed criticism of the cost of the statues, saying that the statues represented cultural identity.
In a statement on Tuesday, the city confirmed that two giant statues of Mandela and Tambo were to be erected in Durban.
The city said the statues were expected to be one of the Durban’s “quintessential tourist attractions” once unveiled later this year in July and September respectively. 

Yesterday the city issued a statement stating that a press briefing meant to take place today with Minister of Arts and Culture Nathi Mthethwa regarding the statues had been postponed indefinitely but did not provide reasons for this. 
“We sincerely apologise in advance for the inconvenience that may emanate from this postponement,” it said in a statement.
Durban-based sculptor, Lungelo Gumede, was confirmed as the sculptor who had secured the tender to design and make the iconic statues.

Gumede has produced many statues of leading political and non-political figures. 
In a statement this week, the DA KZN leader Zwakele Mncwango said the party had written to eThekwini city manager Sipho Nzuza requesting details regarding the cost of the statues.
He said while the DA acknowledged the role played by Mandela and Tambo in the country’s liberation, the statues project raised “reds flags” about public money being spent on an ANC project.

“This money, which belongs to the people of eThekwini and KZN, could have been spent on speeding up service delivery and opening fair access to real, long-term jobs.”
Mncwango added that the party had asked Nzuza to outline which line item of the 2018/19 budget and what vote number was used to approve this expenditure. 
IFP caucus leader in eThekwini municipality Mdu Nkosi said there are many “bread and butter” issues that the city’s parks, recreation and culture unit should be focusing on.

“There is no law that says all municipalities should build ANC leaders’ statues.
“There are crucial issues such as the Mobeni crematorium not working, the lack of burial spaces. Our parks are not clean and are overrun by drug addicts. It is not possible for residents from Ethekwini to take their families to the parks because of the state they are in.
“It is unfortunate that when these discussions happen, the ANC leaders know they are in charge and therefore push these decisions through,” he said.

The Mercury