Durban - Durban metro police are on the hunt for the driver of a minibus taxi who fled the scene after his overloaded vehicle was impounded during a roadblock while he was carrying 38 passengers in Chatsworth on Monday.
Metro police spokesperson Senior Superintendent Parboo Sewpersad said the young driver slowed down and then sped off, with metro police and Road Traffic Inspectorate (RTI) officers in pursuit.

“The RTI had to exceed the speed limit of 120km/* to chase the overloaded taxi on the N2,” said Sewpersad.
Instead of the driver proceeding straight on the M1 to Durban, he made a sharp turn left on to the N2 and continued north.
“He was stopped on the N2, where he abandoned his vehicle and ran away,” Sewpersad added. 

According to regulations, the taxi was supposed to carry 14 passengers at most, but had exceeded the load by 24.
The runaway driver later returned to the roadblock with the owner of the taxi, but ran away for the second time while being questioned.
Sewpersad said the driver fled through the cemetery near Mobeni Heights and disappeared in the bushes.

“The middle-aged man who owns 15 taxis said the driver had been working for him for two months, and he did not know his name or address.” 
The taxi was impounded, and the taxi owner departed to get his documents.
The driver was still at large late yesterday.

“We interviewed the other drivers and community at the roadblock and they indicated that it was a daily occurrence in this area with taxis. They have no respect for the law or for the passengers’ lives,” he said.
During the 24-hour multidisciplinary roadblock operation which started on Monday in Florida Road, Sewpersad said, several overloaded taxis were caught and 36 motorists were arrested for drinking and driving. 
“We have seen a trend of drivers actually carrying the drink in their hands or between their legs while driving and being stopped at the roadblock,” he said.

In addition, many motorists desperate to escape arrest were changing seats with a passenger before the roadblock stop line.
“When they get to the stop line, both drivers are arrested,” Sewpersad said.
He noted that close to 6000 arrests for drunken driving were made last year, with thousands of fines issued.

“We had more than 26000 notices issued that were traffic related and were by-law offences over the festive season,” he said.
The Mercury