DURBAN - The Department of Transport and the Road Traffic Management Corporation are probing the cause of a crash on the N2 near Tugela Bridge at the weekend in which seven family members were killed.
The family was returning home to uMlazi from a funeral when they collided head-on with a Toyota Hilux.

The spokesperson of IPSS Medical Rescue, Paul Herbst, said it was a high-impact collision and some of the deceased had been ejected from the vehicles.
The deceased included Siyabonga Khangelani Ntshingila, 33, who was accompanying family members to attend his in-laws’ funeral. His son, Sphelele, 2, his mother Ntombifikile Angel Ntshingila, Sithembile Ntshingila,30, Samkelisiwe Ntshingila, 27, Luyanda Ntshingila, 35, and Londiwe Ntshingila also died.
A spokesperson for the family, Bongani Ntshingila, said: “We were contacted in the afternoon to be told that they had been involved in an accident on their way back from the funeral. Even now, we are still overwhelmed by grief, but we will have to bury them together because this is one family. We have just come back from the Mandeni mortuary where we observed that this was a horrific accident, as some body parts are missing.”

The spokesperson for the Department of Transport, Mluleki Mtungwa, said it would contact the families of the deceased.
“We want to ensure that those who lost their lives are given dignified burials. We are trying to establish the cause of the crash. We send our deepest condolences to the families affected.”
There were two other crashes at the weekend that resulted in fatalities, including a man in his early 20s who was killed when he crashed his car into a tree yesterday.

The spokesperson for Rescue Care, Garrith Jamieson, said the crash took place near Glenwood High School, just before 3am.
“The driver was trapped in the vehicle and the Durban Fire Department had to use the Jaws of Life to cut him free. Due to the severity of the injuries, he was declared deceased at the scene.”
A cyclist, Craig Diedericks, died after a taxi crash on the M4 near the M27 eMdloti off-ramp. He was part of a group of cyclists on an early morning ride.

“One of the cyclists sustained critical injuries and was treated on the scene by an advanced life support paramedic. Two other cyclists sustained moderate injuries. Once stabilised the patients were transported to hospital by ambulance for further treatment,” said Jamieson.
Diedericks died shortly after arrival in hospital, he said.
- THE MERCURY