Durban - The Cats of Durban organisation are trying to prevent a terrible outbreak of Pan Leukpenia
 . 

 

 In a statement issued on Friday by co-ordinator of the organisation Niki Moore, she asked people with cats to be cautious. 

 

 Moore said they noticed 
 an increase in the number of cat deaths from Pan Leukopenia.  

 

 "A stray that we sterilised two months ago died of Pan this week," she said.   

 

 Moore said Pan is a highly contagious disease (a kind of accelerated AIDS) and any cat that dies of Pan needs to be incinerated, not buried, as the virus lives in the soil for around six months.

 

 "Unfortunately, there is no cure and the disease kills quickly. The first visible symptom is when a cat is crouched in an uncomfortable-looking position and seems dazed.  A stray or feral will not run away," she explained.

 

 "During the final stages, the cat will lie next to a water bowl, seeming to hang over it but unable to drink.  There will possibly be foam or saliva dripping from its mouth.  If you handle such a cat, make sure that you clean and disinfect yourself thoroughly afterwards with a strong solution of F10. Wash clothes and the cat's bedding in hot water and wipe down surfaces with bleach," Moore added. 

 

 She said Durban had a terrible outbreak at the end of 2017.  Moore said she was accused of not taking the epidemic seriously - that was because it had never been quite so deadly or virulent before.  She vows not to make that mistake again.

 

 "Pan is an extremely common disease and is usually not fatal to adult or inoculated cats.  However, this latest strain is vicious and kills quickly and indiscriminately, even cats that do not appear to be at risk," she said. 

 

 "If feeders of colonies start finding their cats disappearing, or they find dead cats with foam around their mouths, it is likely they have died of Pan.  There is nothing you can do except keep your own cats safe," Moore explained. 

 She advised pet owners to get your cat inoculations up to date.

 

 Trappers - wash your traps and covers with bleach.  

 

 Get a spray bottle with a strong F10 solution and spray yourself while working with cats.

 

 "It might sound extreme, but better be safe than sorry... the losses we suffered during that last outbreak were too awful to bear repeating," Moore urged. 

 

 Daily News