DURBAN - A delegation representing the Chatsworth community is hopeful that the final outcome of a meeting with eThekwini Mayor Zandile Gumede will be positive after the city temporarily suspended payment for permits at Chatsworth Stadium.
In January, due to a need for stadium upgrades, the city issued a notice requesting residents to purchase permits ranging from R80 to R180 to make use of the stadium, which was rejected by residents.

Devan Pillay, a member of the delegation and chairperson of the Naidu-Makhaye Sports Confederation, said Gumede had been very sympathetic to the issue during a meeting held on Wednesday.
“She listened to all of us and she also conceded that there should have been more consultation regarding the policy,” said Pillay.
In a statement issued on Wednesday, mayoral spokesperson Mthunzi Gumede said the payment of the athletic training permit at the stadium had been temporarily put on hold, while municipal officials decided on the best way to deal with the issue.

“Mayor Gumede indicated that she would gather all facts from the relevant officials and engage the municipality’s executive council before a decision is made on whether or not the permits should be paid by the athletes for using the stadium for training purposes,” read the statement.
Pillay said the call for the scrapping of tariffs and permits did not only apply to Chatsworth stadium, but stadiums throughout Durban.
“President Cyril Ramaphosa made a call for people to lead healthier lifestyles and that’s what the community is doing,” said Pillay.

Desmond Kylas, a member of the Active Citizens Movement, said a lot of people were relieved that the mayor had taken the decision to look into the matter.
“They are actually quite happy that the mayor has decided to look at this aspect of it.
“We are not against a tariff, provided that it’s aimed at a particular group, like athletes who use the inner track for professional purposes,” said Kylas.

He said ordinary community members use the stadium to walk and jog and there were “fantastic” stories of people who come out to the stadium “just to be healthy”. Kylas added that a petition had been started in the community for the permits to be scrapped.
“To date the petition which went out to the community sits at 2035 signatures and 352 electronic petitions,” he said.
Pillay said another meeting would be scheduled with the mayor after she had taken the issue up with the council.

- THE MERCURY