DURBAN - A Widow's two adult children have lodged a court bid to stop her lavish spending sprees on frivolous hobbies and other unnecessary items.
The elderly woman’s children said she also fell for all kinds of scams as she simply coughed up money or incurred debt to cater for her needs.

Pretoria High Court Judge Johan Louw declared her a prodigal, or person unable to manage her finances. A curator was appointed by the court to manage her affairs on her behalf.
Her daughter said in papers before court that their father, who died in 2007, had always provided his wife with “everything her heart desired”.
After his death the widow moved to a townhouse in the Free State soon afterwards, where the spending started.

The daughter said their mother had a top-of-the-range sewing machine, which she exchanged for an even more expensive one at a hefty price.
When she had an accident with her luxury car, she decided to buy a brand-new top of the range one.
According to the daughter, her mother had the bad habit of starting new hobbies for which she bought everything needed, but never finished any project.

For example, she decided to take oil painting lessons, where she bought the paint at R250 a tube in all colours. She also bought numerous canvasses, but never went for her lessons.
The mother subsequently relocated to Joburg, but left her children with the relocation bill.
She was not happy and again moved to the North West for which her children had to pay. The daughter said she spent R100000 in a short time to buy odds and ends that she did not need.

The mother was also exposed to a scam, as she did not have the ability to say no to people.
She invited fumigators to her home to give her a quotation. They convinced her to pay upfront for the work to be done, which she did.
But they never pitched to do the work and while she was away from home broke into the house and stole almost everything.

“My mother then got it into her head that she wanted to do a counselling course. She enrolled and the person there told her she needed a new laptop.
“She bought a top-of-the-range laptop. Needless to say she never did the course and is sitting with an overpriced laptop that she can hardly use.
“To date she has only sent one email, which she needed assistance to do.”

The daughter said her mother’s spending had recently escalated to new heights. She and her brother then decided to manage their mother’s finances, but this did not put the woman off.
She simply incurred debt and obtained a credit card.
She opened clothing accounts and spent the maximum amount that she could, leaving her children to foot the bill once they had found out about the accounts.

“My mother, acting on a frolic of her own, would book herself on various tours, and in passing mentioned to us that they needed to be paid. She recently bought bath products worth R17500, which are supposed to release oxygen ‘to heal the body’. She financed this by obtaining a loan.”
The widow also recently obtained another credit card with R34000 credit limit. “If she sets her mind on something, it has to be her way or no way,” the daughter told the court.
She said they had no other option than to ask the court to step in. The daughter said they were being saddled with the bills and it also did not help to take their mother’s credit cards away as she always found a way to get what she wanted.

They said the only solution was an order that she may not incur any debts or handle her own financial affairs.
- THE MERCURY