DURBAN - Hundreds of people have come forward to adopt a Verulam baby who was allegedly dumped in a bin by his mother this week.
Reaction Unit South Africa (Rusa) director Prem Balram said it had received approximately 420 telephonic and social media enquiries from the public regarding the adoption of the baby boy.

“Several emails were also received from as far afield as the US, London, Portugal and other parts of Europe with offers to adopt the baby,” said Balram.
He said Rusa would be directing all enquiries to the social worker allocated to the case.
“The public is requested to contact the relevant authorities directly regarding this matter, and Rusa cannot confirm if the child is up for adoption,” he said.

Geetha Moodley, a social worker at Child Welfare Verulam, said that judging by the number of calls received, people did not understand the process and procedures related to adoption.
“People were calling and expecting us to just hand over the baby, whereas the process is really complex,” said Moodley.

 
 
  Hundreds of people have come forward to adopt a Verulam baby who was allegedly dumped in a bin by his mother this week.
 

She said that people would have to go to the closest agency in the area that they lived, open a file and thereafter a screening process would be conducted by a social worker. “An investigation into their circumstances will be done as well as police clearance, and this may take a bit of time,” she said.
Once the screening process was completed, said Moodley, the prospective adoptive couple would then be put on to a waiting list, and each organisation had a waiting list.
She said that once a couple had been matched with a child, they had to appear in court and face a panel from the Department of Social Development.

“The natural parents would also need to sign consent for the adoption to go through in court,” said Moodley.
She added that if the maternal or paternal immediate family would like to raise the child, then they would also have to be screened to check if their circumstances were suitable.
Moodley said that there was also a national registry where social workers put the names of children who could be adopted, and that children could be placed in different areas.

Alternatively, Child Welfare also had a foster care system, said Moodley, where children were placed in unrelated homes if they could not be placed with relatives.
Balram posted an update on the baby on Tuesday night on Rusa’s Facebook page.
“According to a nurse at Osin­disweni Government Hospital, the baby had picked up an infection this afternoon and is receiving treatment,” he said.

He added that the father of the baby had been identified.
The woman, who is not being named to protect the identities of her minor children, appeared in the Verulam Magistrate’s Court yesterday on a charge of child abandonment.
She was granted bail of R1000 and is expected back in court on January 30.

- THE MERCURY