Durban - Teacher unions are calling for the Grade 12 progressed-pupils policy to be scrapped, saying it demoralises teachers and does not receive enough support from the Basic Education Department.
Heaping praise on the policy at the announcement of the 2018 matric results, Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga said the country had the largest number of progressed pupils since the policy was promulgated in 2015. 

The policy entails progressing over-age pupils who have repeated Grade 11 more than once.
Yesterday, trade unions questioned the ingenuity of progressing pupils to matric if the majority of them are barred from writing the full final exam.
Out of 128634 pupils who failed Grade 11 in 2017 and were pushed to matric last year, only 33412 sat for all their subjects. Of these, 20122 passed and 2676 obtained passes that allowed them to enrol at traditional universities.

A whopping 95222 progressed matrics did not sit for all their subjects and were unaccounted for in the national 78.2% pass rate.
National Teachers Union (Natu) deputy president Allen Thompson said the progression policy demoralised teachers because they spend the entire year on matrics who are diverted from the exams.
“It’s not acceptable that we have more than 120000 pupils being progressed and only 33000 write the exams,” he said.

“It means that we are having overcrowded classes. But at the end of the day, people we have been in class the whole year do not sit for exams. That is a waste of time.
“You are attending classes for the whole year, but are then told not to write the full exam. What do you call that? It is wasteful expenditure.”
Thompson said teachers would prefer focusing only on Grade 12s who are guaranteed to write the penultimate school exams.

He called for the scrapping of the policy.
“The policy has to be revised because it is demoralising teachers. This policy is overloading teachers. This policy is wasting the time of pupils.” 
Thompson accused districts of culling progressed pupils just when they had to sit for exams.

“The districts are the ones that come to the school and dictate that some of these pupils must not be allowed to write (full exams). It is because the districts are under pressure to perform,” Thompson said.
Progressed matrics were tricked into writing fewer subjects, he added. 
“They are made to tick for a few exams so that they do not write seven subjects.

“That means even if they fail, that will not affect the pass rate of the district. Results will not be released if you have written fewer subjects,” he said.
The South African Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) decried what it called insufficient support from au- thorities for progressed pupils and teachers.
Sadtu’s provincial secretary, Noma- rashiya Caluza, said that when the policy was first introduced, the union had raised similar concerns to the ones being raised by Natu now.

“We said the department did not have a programme dedicated to assisting the progressed learners. These pupils are treated the same as the ones who had passed on their own. In the end the department expects the teachers to perform miracles,” she said. 
Department spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said the unions were “misleading and naughty”, saying the progression of pupils was not only in Grade 12, but throughout the schooling system.
“As we speak, 63% of pupils who had no hope will be going to universities and TVET colleges instead of repeating Grade 11. Teachers, including Natu members, are proud of the work they have done,” he said. 

Professor Labby Ramrathan, of the UKZN School of Education Studies, said the policy had both negative and positive aspects.
He said it resolved the problem of overage pupils, which created serious problems in schools, but was negative because it created more pressure and work for the teachers.
“The focus should not be on progressing the pupils, but should rather be on streaming them to other skills that would be more beneficial to them and the country,” said Ramrathan. 

The Mercury