DURBAN - The drought in the Western Cape is expected to cost R78.2million in alleviation projects by March31, says Local Government MEC Anton Bredell.
He said the province had faced extreme situations over the past few months, including the fires in the George area late last year.

"That was followed by the Wupperthal disaster and more recently, the fires in the Overberg district. In addition, we’ve been dealing with a drought in the Karoo. The successes we’ve had can be lain at the door of the capacity we’ve built up in the Western Cape over the past 10 years.”
Some of the interventions include the construction of a bulk pipeline between the Zoutkloof Spring and the main reservoir, as well as the equipping and electricity connection of two boreholes to the Zoutkloof line in Laingsburg.
Bredell said that although the situation in the Karoo remained serious, no town has run out of drinking water.

"Over the past weekend there was a statement circulating that Kannaland Municipality had run out of water. This is incorrect. There was a short temporary technical challenge due to maintenance on the water treatment plant. That work was completed by Saturday evening.”
The average dam level in the Western Cape is 51% (2018: 26.5%) while dams that supply the city with water have an average level of 62.6% (2018: 28.3%).
The city said that although dam levels had been declining due to the hot and windy weather, water consumption over the past month had remained on the conservative side.

The city said the average usage, which had remained under 600 million litres of collective usage a day for the period (the Level 3 restrictions stipulate collective usage of 650 million litres a day), was probably due to the water-wise behavioural shifts during the drought crisis period and to the closure of some businesses and industry over the festive season.
Mayoral committee member for Water and Waste Services, Xanthea Limberg, said restrictions remained on a strict drought recovery level as a precaution to deal with rainfall uncertainty.
"We encourage Cape Town’s water ambassadors to maintain their water-wise approach during the drought recovery phase and as the metro moves towards becoming a more water-sensitive city in the near future. We see 2019 as a recovery year."

THE MERCURY