DURBAN - The importance of teaching young children how to treat animals before you let them have pets was highlighted in a recent abuse case investigated by the SPCA.
The SPCA has launched an investigation against a couple into alleged animal abuse and neglect of a Border Collie they had brought for their 5-year-old.

The parents are said to have left the dog, named Bobby, in the care of their young child after giving it as a gift, resulting in the dog having severe neck injuries after being chained for eight months.
The SPCA said Bobby had a successful operation, but still required around-the-clock care.
“We at the Bloemfontein SPCA do not mind providing him with this care as we love to be around Bobby; a sweet and lovely dog who only deserves the best. That being said, Bobby is still not out of the woods, as he still has to fight the severe infection in his trachea and oesophagus,” the organisation said.

It added that as part of his healing, Bobby required special food to compensate for the malnourishment he was subjected to under his previous owners.
“The veterinarian has suggested that he be fed either Eukanuba or Hills. Unfortunately, we do not have this type of food readily available.
“We therefore ask your help in providing Bobby with this food, either by donating a bag of food or making a financial contribution towards its purchase. We know that it is a lot to ask for, especially at this time of the year.”

The SPCA added that they were confident Bobby would be ready for adoption soon.
DotSure pet insurance said the story highlighted the importance of teaching children how to treat animals.
“It’s evident that when it comes to caring for a pet, a lot of basic education is still needed.”

The insurance firm said parents and children needed to be ready for the commitment before they adopted a pet.
“Are you ready for this commitment? It’s said that having a pet teaches kids about responsibility. By including your child in the care of the pet, you have the opportunity to teach your children how to be responsible for another living creature.
“You have the opportunity to teach your child that caring and loving another creature extends much further than just occasionally playing with their new pet.”

- THE MERCURY