CAPE TOWN - Five men aged between 25 and 43 were convicted and sentenced to lengthy jail terms by the Pietermaritzburg high court for murder and robbery committed in Ladysmith, KwaZulu Natal police said on Wednesday.
Thokozani Mvelase, 32, was sentenced to life imprisonment for murder, 10 years for attempted murder, 15 for business robbery and another 15 years for possessing an unlicensed firearm and ammunition. 

Sibusiso Gamede, aged 43, was sentenced to life for murder, 10 years for attempted murder and 15 years for business robbery while Siphamandla Sithole, 26, also got life for murder, 10 years for attempted murder, 15 years for robbery and 15 years for possessing an  unlicensed firearm and ammunition.
Jabulani Lukhele, 26, was sentenced to 30 years imprisonment for murder, eight years for attempted murder and 12 years for business robbery, while 25-year-old Siboniso Nkosi was sentenced to 30 years imprisonment for murder, eight for attempted murder and another 12 for robbery.
Police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane said the men in December 2014 robbed a business in the Peacetown area.

“The owner had just opened his business when the accused arrived. Two security guards were shot and robbed of their firearms by the accused. One guard died at the scene and the second guard was rushed to hospital with gunshot wounds,” said Zwane.
“The businessman was severely assaulted and robbed of his cash, airtime vouchers and cellphones before the suspects fled the scene. Cases of murder, attempted murder and business robbery were opened at Ladysmith police station for further investigation,"
The men were arrested a few hours after the crime. During their arrest, a special revolver stolen during the robbery was recovered, as were cash, airtime vouchers and cellphones.

One of the group, 28-year-old Khulekani Hlatshwayo, confessed and pleaded guilty and was sentenced in February 2015 to 25 years for murder, five for attempted murder and 15 for robbery.
Police were still searching for three other suspects involved in the robbery, Zwane said.
- African News Agency (ANA)