Cape Town - Eskom implemented Stage 6 load shedding on Monday, and had everyone frustrated and scrambling to check their schedules.

 

 This comes after the day started with Stage 2 load shedding, before moving to Stage 4 at around 10am, and ending with the announcement that Stage 6 would kick in at 6pm.

 
  
 
 
  "We regret and sincerely apologise that stage 4 loadshedding will move to Stage 6 loadshedding as from 18:00 today, as a result of a shortage of capacity. This follows a technical problem at Medupi Power Station impacting additional generation supply. The heavy rains has caused coal handling and operational problems at several power stations," Eskom said just after 5.30pm.
 
 
  
 
 
  "We remind and assure customers that loadshedding at Stage 6 is no cause for alarm as the system is being effectively controlled. Stage 6 requires 6000MW to be rotationally loadshed," the power utility said.
 

With the resumption of Eskom’s load shedding, the City of Cape Town has encouraged its residents to plan ahead and to follow a few simple tips to ensure that they stay connected, healthy and safe.



 







  Communication: Ensure that your cell phone, laptop, tablet and radio are always fully charged when power is available. This will allow you to be able to communicate with friends and family during load-shedding
  Transport: Make sure that your vehicle always has fuel in the tank as most petrol stations are unable to pump fuel during power outages
   Cash: Keep some cash on you as ATMs cannot operate without electricity
  Security and safety: Backup batteries for electrically operated gates, garage doors and security systems should be kept in a good working condition and be able to last through periods of load-shedding. Store temporary lighting such as battery-powered torches, gas lamps and candles in places where they will be easy to find in the dark
  Eating: If you do not have a gas stove, prepare meals before the power is scheduled to be switched off. Boil water in your kettle and keep it in thermos flasks for hot drinks. You can also use an insulating cover on teapots, pots and pans to keep drinks and meals warm
  Medication: Most medication requiring refrigeration can be kept in a closed fridge for several hours without spoiling, but you should check with your doctor or pharmacist if in doubt
  Traffic lights: intersections with traffic lights that are not working because of load-shedding should be treated as four-way-stops. The motorists who stops first may proceed first if the way is clear and safe to do so. Please stay calm and follow defensive driving techniques
 


Capetonians are encouraged to find their area and corresponding number on the map below to see when they will be affected by load shedding:



 Cape Argus