How happy are you with your medical practitioner? When last were you 
  admitted to hospital? And how were 
  you treated? 
  These are questions Discovery 
  Health has aimed to answer in its latest 
  annual list of 20 leading South African 
  hospitals – as rated by patients in the 
  annual Patient Survey Score (PaSS).
 
 
  
 
 
  It’s the fifth such survey that the 
  company’s published but the ninth 
  year that it’s conducted the research, 
  undertaken to get a broad overview 
  of the sector.
 
 
  
 
 
  The Top 20 list is based on aggregated surveys which were completed 
  by members of schemes administered 
  by Discovery Health. Members rated 
  their in-hospital experience across various aspects of care. 
  Last year’s PaSS 
  list, which is modelled on a globally 
  validated survey, reveals five newcomers and five hospitals appearing 
  for the fifth consecutive year. 
 
 
  
 
 
  Last 
  year, Discovery Health received about 
  63 000 survey responses from patients 
  admitted to 202 hospitals across the 
  country.
 
 
  
 
 
  Dr Roshini Moodley Naidoo, head 
  of quality of care at Discovery Health, 
  says they’re encouraged by the annual 
  increase in patient participation in 
  the survey after their discharge from 
  hospital. “In 2018, 19% of Discovery members who received the survey 
  submitted a response, up from 14% 
  in 2014.”
 
 
  
 
 
  She says patients’ voices are being 
  heard and they’re powerful: they have 
  influence over how care is delivered.
 
 
  
 
 
  “PaSS creates a systematic and 
  standardised way to capture information about a patient’s experience of 
  care in hospital.
 
 
  
 
 
  “These results are then shared with 
  members on Discovery’s website, creating transparency and driving positive 
  change by helping health-care providers identify gaps that need attention,” 
  says Moodley Naidoo.
 
 
   
 
 
  The survey looked at how well 
  nursing staff and doctors engage and 
  communicate with patients; how well 
  suited the hospital environment is 
 
 
  to the needs of patients (eg are noise 
  levels kept to a minimum); how well 
  pain is managed; how clearly information about medication is shared with 
  patients; whether patients are adequately prepared for discharge (e.g. are 
  they given information about symptoms to look out for that may indicate 
  a need to see the doctor again); and 
  an overall hospital rating including 
  whether patients would recommend 
  the hospital to others.
 
 
  
 
 
  Moodley Naidoo says last year’s 
  results show an improvement in five 
  out of the eight survey categories, 
  with the remaining three categories 
  showing very minimal drops. 
 
 
  
 
 
  “We’re pleased to note that overall 
  Patient Survey Scores have improved 
  by 19% since we began publishing 
  results in 2014, clearly showing that 
  hospitals surveyed are increasingly 
  meeting patient expectations of better 
  care. Running the survey and publishing the results annually, has the 
  same positive impact in our healthcare environment as observed internationally.”
 
 
  
 
 
  She says the categories that patients 
  care about most are how nurses communicate and engage with patients, 
  information about medicine and managing pain.
 
 
  
 
 
  All of these categories delivered 
  higher scores last year: “We believe the 
  survey has a positive impact beyond 
  in-hospital care, as patients who are 
  well prepared for discharge from hospital have better health outcomes and 
  are at lower risk of repeat admissions. 
  This is an important area of focus 
  as repeat admissions are, on a global 
  level, considered a warning sign of a 
  care gap,” explains Moodley Naidoo.
 
 
  
 
 
  Doctors are central to best quality 
  care, and patients have rated doctors 
  the highest out of all survey categories. 
  In each subsequent year, the doctor 
  scores have continued to increase 
  and last year the doctor category was 
  scored by patients at 85.7%.
 
 
  
 
 
  Moodley Naidoo says they wanted 
  to improve quality of care for patients 
  from the doctor and hospital by looking at it through a clinical lens.
 
 
  
 
 
  “This gives them a voice in how 
  health care is designed and improved. 
  It’s about patient centricity – not putting a premium on the funder (Discovery) but creating space to make certain 
  that patients see that as high-quality 
  care.
 
 
  
 
 
  “For Discovery, we contract on the 
  basis of value. We see it as being driven 
  by different components of care – cost 
  is only one aspect – and actual value 
  in the system. It helps us put together 
  the network of care.”
 
 
  
 
 
  For patients, the survey is an effective and empowering decision-making 
  tool, she says.
 
 
  
 
 
  “So, if you have elective surgery, 
  you might want a choice of hospitals 
  – you can look at what they do well, 
  where there is room for improvement.
 
 
  It’s very important for patients where 
  the doctors are.”
 
 
  
 
 
  The PaSS survey though, is not a 
  name and shame exercise – “you don’t 
  drive improvement that way”. 
  It’s important for consumers. In the
 
 
  medical aid environment, there aren’t 
  many such mechanisms that empower 
  patients, so Discovery’s listing three 
  years of data on its website, gives hospitals a better opportunity to improve.
 

 

 

 The Top 20

 Ahmed Al-Kadi Private Hospital 
 Busamed Gateway Private Hospital 
 Busamed Hillcrest Private Hospital 
 Busamed Lowveld Hospital 
 Busamed Modderfontein Private Hospital 
 Busamed Paardevlei Private Hospital
 Cormed Clinic 
 Lenmed Ethekwini Hospital and Heart Centre 
 Lenmed Shifa Hospital 
 Life Bay View Private Hospital 
 Mediclinic Hoogland 
 Mediclinic Panorama
 Mediclinic Plettenberg Bay
 Mediclinic Strand 
 Mediclinic Victoria
 Mediclinic Worcester
 Melomed Bellville Medical Centre
 Midlands Medical Centre
 Moot Algemene Hospital 
 Zuid-Afrikaans Hospital