Johannesburg - Former president Jacob Zuma has announced his intention to withdraw from the commission of inquiry into state capture, threatening to approach the courts over the commission's conduct.
The former president's legal team dropped the bombshell minutes after the inquiry got under way on Friday after a tense conclusion on Wednesday. 

Zuma and his legal team had on numerous occasions accused the commission of subjecting the former president to cross-examination, despite not applying to do so. 
Minutes into proceedings, Advocate Muzi Sikhakhane SC, on behalf of Zuma, dropped the bombshell of the former president's decision to withdraw.
"We've come to tell you that because of... reservations we've raised, my client has instructed me to tell you he will take no further part in these proceedings. 

"He respected you and the commission but the commission has no ground rules," he told commission chair Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo.
Sikhakhane went on to outline the numerous reasons for withdrawing from the inquiry, including correspondence from the commission's legal team, which he labelled "cheeky" and "tedious".
He also claimed the former president was being treated as an accused and not like other witnesses who'd previously appeared before the commission. 

He added that they were contemplating approaching the courts to challenge the commission's conduct. 
"We see a route to go to the courts... we want to take the conduct of this commission further. I cannot come here and then be forced to lead my client to Kgosi Mampuru Prison."
After Sikhakhane's lengthy address to Zondo, evidence leader Advocate Paul Pretorius was given a chance to respond to allegations made by Zuma's legal team, where he denied the questioning Zuma had been subjected to went beyond the commission's terms of reference or the invitation extended to the former president

"We will follow the rules to the letter... We are quite happy to abide by the rules," Pretorius insisted in his response. 
After this, Zondo addressed the commission and expressed disappointment in the turn of events over the past few days. He said he had been confident following Wednesday's adjournment that a resolution would be reached between the two legal teams 
"I am disappointed that yesterday, a situation allowed to happen where I went to bed without knowing how the discussions were going.

"When we adjourned I expressed confidence that both teams would find common ground, I didn't say that without any basis. I had a basis which gave me confidence that two teams could find each other. Of course, there was no guarantee but I had confidence."
Zondo said while he noted Zuma's decision, he requested that both teams meet in his chambers to ventilate the matter further. 
He further said the decision to invite Zuma to appear before the commission was his and not the commission's legal team, saying there was no basis to criticise the commission's legal team. 

The inquiry continues.
IOL