Cape Town has no shortage of restaurants and might be known for fine dining and high-end wine pairings, but the majority don’t wine and dine, instead they prefer the home-grown flavours of local cuisine.
Whether it's fine dining or street food you're after, you don't have to look very far to find a place that satisfies your cravings or budget.

It's no wonder that The Golden Dish in Gatesville, Athlone has been voted Cape Town's favourite takeaway spot. 
In a poll carried out by local cooldrink brand, Jive, Golden Dish came out tops, beating Home of the Whopper, Wembley Roadhouse in Belgravia and Eastern Food Bazaar in the CBD.


  
   
    
     
     
      
     
    
   
    
   
    
     
      
       

       
      
     
    
   
    
    
      View this post on Instagram
    
   
    
   
     
      
      
     
    
     
      
     
    
     
      
      
     
    
    
   With my friend @shaheensydow at his favorite: #GoldenDish #Capetown as we tackle a #gatsby. What's a gatsby? A reason to come here. This one: The Chicken Full House, with egg, cheese, fries, lettuce, peri-peri spice and sauce. (Also had a Masala Steak Full House). I lie down now. #WhatPhilsHaving #NetflixAndPhil

A post shared by  Phil Rosenthal (@phil.rosenthal) on Sep 14, 2017 at 8:30am PDT




People could vote for their favourite restaurant or takeaway by using #LetsJiveTogether on social media platforms. 

Jive spokesperson, Sean Burton says: “While Cape Town is the foodie capital of South Africa, the real flavours have been battling it out on the streets, and we decided it was time these foods were united under one banner. The western Cape's food culture consists of more than just fine dining and fancy food pairings. It’s about the diversity of foods and flavours that represent everyone.” 
Located on the corners of Hazel and Klipfontein Road in Gatesville, Golden Dish has become a Cape Town institution since it opened in the 1960's. 
Golden Dish owner Mohamed Rafiq Parker says: “It means we’re doing something right to be named as the people’s favourite. Our food is addictive."  Whether you crave a steak or full house gatsby cut in four to share with friends, a chip roll after a night of clubbing or just a samoosa to nibble on before your next meal, Golden Dish is the first choice for many.Of course, there are many other fast food gems around the Mother City if gatsby and chip rolls are not your thing.Here's where you can get your fix around the city:New Hope Spaza, Langa New Hope Spaza on the corner of Bhunga Avenue and Ndabeni Street in Langa is arguably the best vetkoek spot in Town. A personal favourite, these magwinyas are just R2.50 and taste great on its own or with a filling of your choice. 
 
   
    
     
      
      
       
      
     
    
     
    
     
      
       
        

        
       
      
     
    
     
     
       View this post on Instagram
     
    
     
    
      
       
       
      
     
      
       
      
     
      
       
       
      
     
     
    Stop 1/4 of our Jive taxi tour was at New Hope Spaza in Langa. 🚕 This place really has the best vetkoek! I’ve been going there for years and I’ve never been disappointed. Our first unique pairing was vetkoek and mince with @jivecooldrinks_ orange krush flavour. Disclaimer: I still have a few days left before my 30 day vegan challenge officially ends, but today was my cheat day.😛There was no way I could pass an opportunity to enjoy a real Cape Town dite. 🤭 #jivetogether #jivecooldrinks #vetkoek

A post shared by  Megan (@meganbaadjies) on Nov 28, 2018 at 7:25am PST

  
 
 
The Grillfather SA, Mitchells Plain and WynbergHome of the Cape Town famous Tsek Burger and the new mighty 2.8kg YOH Burger (it doesn't get more Cape Town than that) this local burger joint is known for, well, their giant burgers packed with more fillings than you can sink your teeth in. Mitchells Plain:15 Simonsig Ave, Westridge, Mitchells Plain Wynberg: 46 Church Street, Wynberg 
  
   
    
     
     
      
     
    
   
    
   
    
     
      
       

       
      
     
    
   
    
    
      View this post on Instagram
    
   
    
   
     
      
      
     
    
     
      
     
    
     
      
      
     
    
    
   You thought the #TsekBurger was BIG. 😱 Introducing the Mighty #YOHBurger weighing in at a whopping 2.8kg.... Topped with Beef, Cheese, braised onions, pepper dew Chutney, Mushroom sauce and Chips on top of a monster roll with Shredded lettuce, tomatoes, and cucumber. ONLY R280.00 Available from Friday the 01/02/19 Mitchell's Plain Branch only! 0843192573 While stocks last YOH Radio #EatLikeABoss #ProppaFood #GrillfatherSA #Halaal 😎 #YOHBurger

A post shared by  The Grillfather S.A 🇿🇦 (@thegrillfather_sa) on Jan 31, 2019 at 8:35am PST

The Pavement Chef, City CentreThere's not much that R15 can get you, especially not in the heart of the city. However, at the Pavement Chef in Burg Street R15 gets you a boerewors roll or a burger - with onions AND salads! Tucked away next to Clicks on the corners of Burg and Church Street, these burgers are real value for money and enough to satisfy your lunchtime craving. Plus, the owner always gives you service with a smile! 
 
 
  For R15 you can get a boerewors roll or burger at The Pavement Chef in Burg Street, Cape Town.